Announcer:
Last week...
Watch and learn.
a classic
Gordon Ramsay dish...
He takes a simple egg
and turns it
into the Taj Mahal.
Announcer:
...sent six home cooks...
Gordon:
His eggs looks
really runny.
...to the bottom
of the competition.
You'll be doing
this challenge
all over again.
‐ Please, God, please, God.
‐ and when they scrambled
for redemption...
‐ ( gasps )
‐ Heather cracked
under the pressure.
( coughs )
Gordon:
The color is dark and gray.
Ending her time
in the MasterChef kitchen.
Tonight...
‐ Gordon: Lamb.
‐ Cool.
The top 17 have
front row seats
to a Gordon Ramsay
master class.
Can we do this today?
This is crazy.
Gordon:
You've got to speed up.
And when the competition
heats up,
who has the chops...
‐ Whoo‐hoo!
‐ It's beautifully done.
You just cook
like a chef's dream.
to make the cut?
What in the ( bleep )
happened?
Welcome, everybody.
Please make your way
to the front.
Let's go.
Top 17.
Being a nutritionist,
food is my passion.
So being able
to breathe and live
in the MasterChef kitchen
is just like
a dream come true.
It's time to get
your next challenge started.
Let's go.
I haven't been
in the bottom yet,
but I haven't got
a win yet.
I am so tired
of just coasting.
So it's like,
time to show up
and show out.
So now they're gonna find out
what Eboni is all about.
Tonight, we'll be testing
all of you talented home cooks
on something
extremely technical.
Let's see what we got.
Now, you all
are about to face
what we call
a skills test.
A true master chef
needs to know
their way
around butchering.
And on the menu tonight,
Colorado's finest...
‐ lamb.
‐ Oh!
This one is immaculate.
But it doesn't start out
like this.
It starts out like...
this.
Most home cooks buy
their rack of lamb
from a butcher,
fully prepped,
with all that fat
and membrane removed.
We call that Frenching.
Tonight, you'll have
to French your rack of lamb
like a master butcher.
Now, I'm gonna show you
how it's done.
All of you, please,
watch and learn.
Now, hold
your rack of lamb up
and then run your thumb
down the outside
and gently peel back
that first layer
of fat.
From there,
place it on the board
and then just very carefully,
lift the fat up and slice.
Be careful.
One slip of the knife here
and you've lost a finger.
As I pull back this fat,
you can start to see
the layers of bones exposed.
Now, this is where
the real work starts.
What you want to do
is separate the sinew
from the bones.
So, knife goes in and down
and you peel away.
Turn the knife over,
again, peel.
This is a labor of love.
Knife goes in,
twist.
Get your cloth,
and this little bit
of sinew here
you pull over
and down.
‐ See how it's coming off?
‐ Home cooks: Yes.
And then trim
that lamb beautifully.
Now, once those bones
are cleaned,
go around
for a second time,
scrape down both sides
of the bones.
And look how clean
those bones are getting..
Really important to get
every little scrap,
'cause if not, the bones
look dirty and unpresentable.
And then finally,
this dense layer of fat
needs to come off.
Jason:
My eyes are as wide
as saucers.
Chef Ramsay looks so smooth
and precision‐like.
Everything is just moving
like a well‐oiled machine.
Can we do this today?
This is crazy.
Once you get
to the very end,
give the bones
a final polish.
And that is how you
French trim a rack of lamb
like a true master chef.
( cheers )
‐ Good luck.
‐ All: Thank you, chef.
All right, home cooks.
Please go to your stations.
Newton:
As a rancher in Texas,
I raise cattle.
So I know my way
around the knife.
This is gonna be
no big deal.
This is like a cakewalk.
I'm gonna take
these young kids out.
It's time to send them
back to their millennial life
with the taverns, the beer,
and hip‐hop music.
Christina: In front of you,
you each have a gorgeous,
raw rack of lamb.
At the end
of this challenge,
you should be left
with a pristine,
Frenched rack of lamb,
just like Gordon's.
The home cooks
that complete
this skills challenge
to our standards
will be safe.
But those that fail
to execute the technique
will immediately face
an elimination challenge
where at least one of you
will be sent home tonight.
You'll all have
20 minutes
to perfectly butcher
those incredible
racks of lamb.
‐ Is everybody ready?
‐ Yes, chef.
Your 20 minutes
starts...
now.
‐ Christina: Come on, guys.
‐ Gordon: Come on.
Now, French rack of lamb
is the most pristine,
Rolls‐Royce cut of lamb
anywhere in the world.
This is something
that takes years to master
in professional kitchens.
Gordon, you made it
look easy.
But what are
the potential pitfalls?
You have to be precise,
every cut.
Take too much fat off
and you've lost half
of the rack of lamb.
There we go.
Tonight's purpose
is all about trimming it
properly,
finish with those
bones clean,
and making sure
that you're left
with 90%
of that cannon intact.
You know, in Boston,
I have not butchered
a rack of lamb.
So it's not something
I'm familiar with.
But my mother
grew up on a farm.
I always watched her
in the kitchen growing up.
And I just hope
I paid enough attention
back then,
paid enough attention
just now when chef was
demonstrating.
I think I'm on
the right path here.
And I just have to keep
doing what I'm doing.
I have cut
a rack of lamb before,
it's been
a very long time.
Rack of lamb was
one of my sister‐in‐law's
favorite dishes
and she passed away
five years ago,
so I'm doing this for her.
Gordon:
Guys, five minutes gone.
15 minutes to go.
Gotta be on those bones now.
Come on,
you son of a bitch.
Oh, my God.
There's so much fat.
‐ Eboni.
‐ Yes, chef?
‐ Now, do you eat lamb often?
‐ I love lamb.
I cook it almost every Sunday
for my husband.
But I've never
cleaned one like this.
Confident you can get
yourself up on the balcony?
Hopefully.
I'm hoping for that.
‐ Good luck.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Ah!
‐ All right, Jenny.
‐ Hi, chef.
‐ I've gotta believe
you've eaten
some lamb
in your day, no?
‐ Nope.
‐ Not really?
You seem a little frazzled,
what's going on?
Um, to start with,
a French cut is a little bit
intimidating.
I'm not sure what to leave
and what to take off.
And we'll see how good
I can make it.
Jenny, I need to see
that confidence out of you
right now.
‐ Okay, please?
You can do it, all right?
‐ I know, I'm feeling kinda...
‐ I know.
‐ Good luck, mama.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Stick with it.
‐ Right, Reba.
Have you done this before?
‐ No, sir.
‐ This is my first time.
‐ Really?
I've never even at lamb.
‐ What?
‐ No.
‐ Seriously?
‐ So what's the
go‐to meat that you hunt?
Deer, squirrel, rabbit.
‐ Squirrel? You don't eat
squirrel, do you?
‐ Yeah.
What part of the squirrel
is the best bit for you then?
‐ I like the squirrel legs.
‐ Squirrel legs?
My uncle likes
to suck the brains.
‐ He sucks the brains?
‐ Throw the head in there
and just suck the brains
out of it.
It's just juicy
and succulent.
And it's delicious.
‐ But they're vermin.
‐ I don't care, they're good.
Young lady, get yourself safe
up on the balcony.
Good luck.
Ten minutes remaining.
‐ All right, Jason.
‐ Hi.
How confident are you
in this challenge?
Uh, I'm a little
out of my element here.
Lamb used
in Chinese cooking
is always cut up
into pieces,
so this is just
a very different
presentation.
I just wanna
do it justice.
Well, you're
a teacher, right?
So you know what it takes
to be a good student,
so stay focused
and good luck.
Thank you, chefs.
Right, Cate.
Ever French trimmed
one of these at home?
‐ No. But I'm very familiar
butchering deer.
‐ Right.
You know, I grew up
hunting and fishing
and being like a wild child.
How confident are you
to nail this tonight?
You know what,
I'm confident,
I just need to get this
Frenching technique down.
‐ Good luck, young lady.
‐ Thank you, chef.
Whoo‐hoo.
Five minutes remaining.
You've got to speed up.
Now, guys, who do you think's
gonna really succeed?
For me, Newton.
You gotta believe
that him working on a ranch
can be a huge advantage
for Newton.
So I'm looking
for big things from him.
Reba's is incredible.
And Reba's
never done it before.
Those bones are
immaculate, guys.
Now there are some
home cooks out there
that are definitely
struggling.
Yeah. Sam, he's had
some serious struggles
in this kitchen.
His confidence seems down.
I'm really concerned
that it might get
the best of him.
Christina:
I'm worried about Jennifer.
Come on, Jennifer.
Please.
She looks
all over the place.
Messy board, messy knife.
I agree, she's kind
of just hacking at the lamb.
All right, guys,
you have just 60 seconds.
You want your rack of lamb
to be beautiful enough
to bring you to the safety
of the balcony.
Come on, Eboni.
Let's push.
Gordon: Use your cloth.
Come on, guys, you can do this.
‐ Christina:
Polish those bones.
‐ Push, Caitlin.
Gordon:
Finishing touches.
Let's go.
Judges:
Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one.
‐ Stop. Hands in the air.
‐ Hands in the air.
You want your rack of lamb
to be beautiful enough
to bring you to the safety
of the balcony, guys.
Let's go.
Judges:
Five, four, three,
two, one.
Stop. Hands in the air.
Wow. Well done.
It's time to find out
who did enough
to get themselves safe
up there on the balcony.
Jason. You're a teacher,
you work with numbers
and grades
‐ all the time, right?
‐ Yes.
‐ How do you think you did?
‐ I think I did, probably,
92%.
A 92%?
Jason, you're selling
yourself short.
This is more like a 98.
All right?
It has the right ratio
of meat to bone.
The way that you brought
down all of the fat
right to the perimeter
of the cannon or the eye.
Unbelievable job.
My man, you are
definitely safe.
‐ Please go upstairs.
‐ Thank you very much.
Thank you.
98% from chef Sánchez.
I mean, come on, for real?
‐ Look at that eye.
‐ Very good.
To know that I got
a nice passing grade
and I'm up to the balcony,
that's the best
feeling ever.
Jennifer.
Describe your performance
because it looked like
you were struggling.
I was struggling
a little bit,
but I feel like
that I've paid a lot
of attention,
and I tried my best.
So let's cut straight
to the chase.
Those bones look terrible.
There's still meat
on the bone.
They are caked in sinew.
And you haven't focused
on cleaning any of those bones.
‐ Yes, I‐‐
‐ That does not look like
the Rolls‐Royce of lamb.
‐ That looks like
a dog chew.
‐ Yes, chef.
You are definitely not
heading up on the balcony.
I understand.
Sam, how do you think
you did?
I did my best.
I got all of the fat off,
I believe.
I would've liked to have
gotten the bones cleaner.
Well, it's very uneven.
It's been completely
hacked up over there.
You can see the grooves
from your knife
as you were sawing.
That's right.
This doesn't
cut the mustard.
You are not safe.
( sighs )
All right, Cate,
how do you think you did?
Um, I'm happy,
it's presentable.
But I don't think
I'm the best butcher yet.
You know,
I'm like a tomboy,
I'm kinda rough
around the edges.
Well, Cate, I gotta say,
there's nothing
rough around the edges
about your butchery.
‐ This is a gorgeous,
gorgeous rack of lamb.
‐ Oh, jeez, thanks.
It's incredibly impressive.
Thank you so much.
Look at that beautiful
cannon there.
Great job with those bones.
They're polished.
That is the closest
rack of lamb I've seen
to Gordon's all night.
‐ You are safe.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Head up to the balcony.
‐ First girl. I'm coming, guys.
Beautiful. I mean,
literally, textbook.
‐ Hey.
‐ Jason: Yay.
Eboni. You said this was
the highlight of any Sunday
lunch for your man.
It is.
Honestly, you've just taken
the most expensive cut of lamb
‐ anywhere in the world...
‐ Mm‐hmm.
and made it look
the cheapest.
Even the bones
aren't cleaned.
‐ What happened?
‐ I was trying to take
my time too much.
That's not French trimmed.
That's French screwed.
‐ Stay where you are,
young lady.
‐ Mm‐hmm.
Eboni:
I cannot believe
that I messed up
on something that I cook
almost every week.
I just want to crawl
under a rock right now.
'Cause now I gotta
face elimination,
and this sucks.
‐ Jeff, it's good.
You are safe.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Brien, you're safe.
Congratulations.
‐ Thank you, chefs.
Please head up
to the balcony.
Gabriel, you should be
very proud of yourself.
That's one of
the best ones
we've seen.
Head on up
to the balcony.
‐ Great job.
‐ Thank you, chef.
Christina:
That's a lot of fat
right there.
Caitlin, I'm afraid
to say you're not safe.
Aarón:
Daniel, those bones
are immaculate.
‐ You are safe.
‐ Thank you very much, chef.
It's like you
were hacking at it.
What's happened to you?
I wasn't in
the game today, chef,
and obviously
this proves it.
Christina:
Jenny, you're staying here.
Gordon:
Yachecia, you know...
I mean, that is...
textbook.
Bones are clean.
You've got the cannon
beautifully round.
When you see something
that beautiful,
before it's even cooked,
can you imagine
what that looks like
when it comes out of
the oven and hits the table?
‐ You're beyond safe.
‐ Thank you, chef.
‐ Thank you so much.
‐ Head on upstairs.
Reba, how'd you do?
I don't think
I done too bad
for my first time.
Gotta tell you, Reba,
in all the weeks I've seen
you cook in this kitchen,
I've never seen you
so comfortable before.
‐ Thank you, ma'am.
‐ That's definitely one
of the best of the night.
You are safe.
Please head up
to the balcony.
‐ Good job.
‐ Nice job.
Yay, Reba!
Way to go, Reba.
Aarón:
You're a ranch owner.
You see animals
all the time, right?
Yes, sir.
Presentation of this lamb
is so crucial,
to deliver
that "wow" factor.
Newton...
it's a mess.
I mean, what did
that rack of lamb do to you?
It's one of the most difficult
challenges I've been in.
Oof.
Aarón:
I think I need
glue for that.
I just got too much of
the fat off around the bones
or something
when I was cleaning.
But it's rough
as a night in jail.
"Rough as a night
in jail."
Well, there's
one thing right.
That's a crime.
‐ I think I need glue for that.
‐ I just got too much
of the fat off
around the bones
or something.
I thought you were
gonna nail this.
It's too heavy‐handed.
Newton,
I think you know,
with that kind
of performance,
you're not safe.
You're staying right here.
‐ I'm sorry, Newton.
‐ Thank you, chef.
I'm just‐‐
my head's a‐spinning.
I mean, this should've
been a cake walk.
I just turned
this great piece of meat
into horse manure.
And I'm starting to have
a lot of self‐doubt.
To all 11
of you up there,
we were
thoroughly impressed,
and all of you
are safe tonight.
Two of you in particular
really impressed us
with your technique.
Those two
home cooks are...
Cate...
and Yachecia.
‐ Well done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Thank you, thank you.
‐ ( cheers, applause )
‐ Thank you.
‐ Stellar job.
Thank you, chef.
Christina:
Six of you remain
down here at your stations.
We will say goodbye
to at least one of you tonight.
Please, all of you,
down to the front.
I'm not used to being
at the bottom of anything
I do in life.
I'm usually one
that excels to the top,
so I feel very vulnerable,
but I'm ready to step up
to the challenge.
You all now are gonna
have to take
the rack of lamb
that you butchered
and turn it into
not just a dish
worthy of this kitchen,
but a dish worthy
of any of my restaurants.
All of you
will be making...
my delicious
herb‐crusted rack of lamb
with potato fondant,
honey‐glazed carrots,
and an incredible
red wine sauce.
Now, I'm going
to show all of you
how to replicate
this intricate dish.
Watch and learn.
Start off with the oil,
and get that pan
really nice and hot, okay?
With a herb‐crusted
rack of lamb,
you cannot
season after it,
so you need to season it
right at the very beginning.
Salt and pepper.
Season it generously,
both sides.
Make sure the rack of lamb
is seasoned throughout.
There. As the oil
comes up to temp...
...start to sear
this beautiful rack of lamb.
Garlic in,
and then in with
this fresh, fragrant thyme.
Don't over‐sear the lamb.
So nice, gentle color.
Searing in the ends,
locking in
all that flavor.
And then from there,
lay out your thyme,
and your garlic,
and you literally
sit that on top.
That acts as a trivet.
Beautiful.
Couple of knobs of butter.
As the butter
starts to melt,
then tilt the pan
and baste.
What does that do?
Moistens it, keeps it
from drying out.
Exactly that.
Eboni:
Chef Ramsay is cooking
right in front of my face.
This is, like,
phenomenal.
We're gonna cook that
in the oven now
for four minutes.
I'm literally blinking
like I'm taking snapshots
of him, doing this demo
so I can remember every step
exactly how he did it.
Now, once the lamb
is parcooked,
as it's still
nice and warm,
the secret now
is to get your brush.
and you've got
your Dijon mustard,
and you brush
while it's warm,
with that mustard,
so the mustard seeps in,
and literally
almost tenderizes
the lamb even more.
Here I've got
panko breadcrumbs,
parmesan cheese,
salt, pepper,
and fresh basil.
From there,
take your lamb,
roll up, and you roll
all the way along.
Tilt... tilt,
and shake off
any excess breadcrumbs.
Place it back
into the pan,
and then back into the oven
for four more minutes.
From there,
we get our garnish plate.
This is a fondant potato.
Potato's peeled,
cut out with a cutter,
into a pan,
hot heat.
As they color,
you turn them over,
put some stock in,
and they go in the oven.
Braised carrots,
you can all do that
with your eyes closed.
‐ What's the hero tonight?
‐ All: The lamb.
Four minutes later,
take this out.
And you let it rest.
What happens when
we slice meat piping hot?
Juices run out of it
and it becomes dry.
Yeah.
Now, I take my bone,
open that up there,
and I'll come in here,
'cause I want one nice,
beautiful chop.
I go down.
I come off.
And I place
onto the plate.
Come to the second
one here.
One clean,
straight slice.
Shake off any excess,
and on.
This bone here,
too thin,
so I come round,
I take that off.
That's for my bulldog.
I come back up,
and I cut
all the way
through again.
‐ Third one. Now...
‐ Beautiful, chef.
...finally,
you take your sauce...
and you sauce very carefully
around the plate,
and just over the actual bone,
not on that crust.
And there you have
a beautiful, stunning,
crusted rack of lamb
with fondant potatoes
and glazed carrots.
( applause )
Thank you.
Now, please, all of you,
head back to your stations.
Thank you.
Now I gotta recreate
one of Gordon Ramsay's dishes.
He doesn't get Michelin stars
for throwing out horse manure.
And I gotta use
this piece of meat that
I've kind of macerated.
There's not much meat
left on the bone.
I need a miracle
just to survive this.
At your stations,
you'll find everything
you need
to make Gordon's
stunning lamb dish.
You have just
60 minutes, guys,
to pull off this extremely
technical, complicated dish.
‐ Is everybody ready?
‐ All: Yes, chef.
60 minutes starts...
‐ ...now.
‐ Woman: Let's go, guys.
Man: You can
do this, guys.
Clean this up.
Looking good, Jenny.
I've never made
rack of lamb before.
I've never had
rack of lamb before,
so I'm definitely getting
out of my comfort zone.
I don't think I've
been in my comfort zone
this whole competition,
but I'm not going out
without a fight.
This seems like
a daunting task,
to be able to recreate
one of your signature dishes
after they've already
jumbled up a little bit
of their lamb rack.
I'm worried
that this might be
too much, Gordon.
The saving grace tonight
is that they
have double
the amount of lamb
in front of them
than they actually need
to put on a plate.
Eight bones in each rack.
They only need
three stunning cutlets.
So you can bounce back
with this.
20 minutes gone.
Just under 40 minutes
remaining.
‐ Eboni, how you feeling?
‐ Yes, chef. I'm okay, chef.
‐ I'm amazed you're down here,
you know that.
‐ I know. Me too.
This is a protein
that you cook every week
for your husband.
My husband have a fit, I go
home on the lamb challenge.
That might be a divorce.
You're more confident about
the cooking of it, yes?
I always cook mine
pretty rare,
so I think
I'm okay with that.
I'm concerned with
making the plate look
as good as yours
and making sure
all my flavors are there.
‐ Good luck.
‐ Thank you.
Yachecia:
Come on, Sam.
Sam, how we feeling
over here, buddy?
I'm pretty good.
I've prepped all
of my vegetables,
I've seasoned my lamb.
I've cleaned these three
a fair amount more.
You'll have enough meat
to give me three
beautiful medallions
of lamb.
‐ That's the idea.
‐ Are you confident?
‐ I am confident.
‐ I need you to step back.
‐ Come on, man.
‐ All right, I'm doing it.
I'm doing it!
‐ Good.
‐ Reba: Yeah,
let's go, Sam!
Whoo!
Right.
How you doing?
Pretty good.
Little embarrassed
about my performance.
I'm a rancher.
You know, you'd think
I'd know my way around
a skills contest
with the lamb.
Didn't work out that way,
so it's all about redemption
for me right now.
Are you confident
you can pull this off?
‐ I am.
‐ You are.
Do I have that
fight in you?
‐ You do have that fight in me.
‐ I want to see it.
‐ I want to see you
nail it, okay?
‐ Fair enough.
‐ Good luck.
‐ Thank you.
Gordon:
Just under 30 minutes
to go, guys.
Where's the...
( groans )
Jennifer, there's time.
You don't need
to be frazzled.
Jennifer looks like
she's over her head.
Oh, dear.
I did forget
the ( bleep ) cheese, though.
Cate:
Jen, deep breaths,
you got it.
Jennifer isn't
the best under pressure,
and she gets frazzled
in the kitchen
all the time.
My biggest demon
in this competition
is my memory,
trying my best to remember
every step
that Chef Ramsay had said.
And if I don't,
that's it for me.
I could be going home.
She is a flurry.
Oh, God.
I can't watch that.
I'm worried she's
gonna crumble.
Ugh.
I'm worried
she's gonna crumble.
Oh, God.
I can't watch that.
Jennifer, look at me.
You can do this.
Listen, you do your best
when you're focused,
and when you're confident.
This doesn't have
to be your last night
in this kitchen, okay?
I don't want it to be.
What are you worried about
in terms of this dish?
When do I put
this lamb on?
Like, my mind
is like, "Do it now."
Okay, so let's
talk through it.
How long does it need
to sear the first time?
Two minutes,
not even.
And then what
happens next?
You put it in the oven
for four minutes,
and then take it out,
and then you mustard
encrust it
and then put it in there
for four minutes.
You got it.
Nice job.
Don't let that other voice
in your head get you.
I believe in you.
‐ You can do this.
‐ I appreciate it, thank you.
Daniel: Let's go, Jen!
Let's go, Jennifer!
‐ Let's go, Jen!
‐ Come on, Jennifer!
Miss Caitlin,
talk to me.
You eat a lot
of lamb and meat, right?
I eat a lot of meat,
but not a lot of lamb.
I normally consider it
pretty far out of my budget.
Really? Okay, well,
are you feeling good
about everything?
I'm feeling okay
so far.
I'm just gonna focus
on the task at hand
and make sure I don't
overcook tonight's lamb.
All right, make sure
that your timing
is concise,
‐ Yes, chef.
‐ And you deserve
not to be in the bottom,
‐ but where?
‐ I deserve to be
on the balcony tonight.
Aarón:
Okay, show us
you can do it.
Gordon:
Guys, just under
ten minutes to go.
Sauce should be reducing.
Carrots, potatoes,
coming together.
Gordon:
Wow, it's intense.
Eboni is a little bit
down in the dumps.
This is the rack of lamb
that she cooks
for her family
every Sunday,
but she never trims it.
I'm just hoping
that she doesn't get
herself into a muddle
with the cooking
of that lamb.
My concern is
that Sam's crust
looks very separated.
It's not emulsified.
It has too much
bread crumb in it.
( sighs )
Two and half
minutes to go.
Lamb should be
out resting.
Christina:
Come on, guys.
Come on, damn it.
Gordon:
Start dressing
your plates.
Perfect slices.
Man:
Jenny, love that crust.
Aarón:
Every last detail, guys.
‐ Gordon: Come on.
‐ Christina: Whoo!
Come on,
get it all on the plate.
‐ Focus on finishing strong.
‐ Man: Come on, guys.
Gordon:
Here we go, ten...
‐ ( cheers, applause )
‐ Judges: Nine, eight...
seven, six, five...
four, three, two, one!
‐ Stop!
‐ That's it.
Hands in the air!
‐ ( applause )
‐ Gordon: Well done.
It's time to see who was able
to turn this night around.
and to find out of course
who is heading home for good.
First up, Eboni.
Let's go, please.
I really feel like I let
my husband and my kids down
the way I butchered
this lamb.
So I really hope
that I redeem myself
with the cook on it
especially,
but in this competition,
you never know.
Okay, first off,
across those 60 minutes,
you looked down.
You okay?
I'm okay.
I was concentrating,
trying to put
everything in order
to make sure I don't
forget anything.
Here's the thing, Eboni.
Ten minutes ago,
the way you were cooking,
I thought you had
one foot out the door.
So, I'm amazed you've got
something looking this good.
Visually,
it looks beautiful.
Lamb is not hacked.
It's sliced beautifully.
Love that nice
dark green crust.
It's almost like
the sort of field of grass
that the sheep's
come out on.
It's beautifully done.
Slicing that lamb
is like slicing
through butter.
And look, when you slice
through there,
pink, and then the crust,
nice and crispy.
Uh, the dish is delicious.
Let's get that right.
Thank you, chef.
Gordon:
Lamb is cooked
to perfection.
Carrots beautifully glazed,
sauce not too thick.
What would I change?
Cook the potatoes
a bit longer.
But here's the thing,
you just cook like
a chef's dream.
I need you just
sounding more confident,
just start
believing in yourself
a little bit more.
‐ Great job.
‐ Thank you, chef.
Now, Eboni,
what did you season
this lamb with?
I used some thyme, garlic.
And how much of
that mustard did you
brush down on that lamb?
Two, three tablespoons.
It's delicious.
It's well‐seasoned.
Your vegetables
are beautifully cooked.
You've never made
this dish before,
and yet your replication
of Gordon's dish is
almost exact.
‐ Thank you, chef.
‐ Nice job.
Brien:
Good job, Eboni!
Sam, come forward.
I've been in
the bottom a lot,
but I'm confident
with my dish.
It's no more flunking.
I'm ready to get
that A paper.
That's what I'm here
to show the judges today.
Sam, how do you feel
it went for you there?
I made some mistakes,
but I got everything there,
and frankly, it's one of
the prettier plates I've
presented for you guys.
The lamb. Why did you
choose to sauce
the top part
of the chop?
I was trying to keep
the sauce off the crust,
most importantly.
What is that?
I think that's some
of the sauce that congealed.
I think maybe you
over‐reduced it,
which is a little bit
disappointing.
I think the fact that you
sauced the top of the lamb
also shows
a lot of oversight.
( sighs )
Look at that.
That right there is rare,
black and blue, right?
I mean, this thing
still has fur on it.
I mean‐‐ ( coughs )
here's the deal.
Had this lamb been cooked
a little bit better,
I can overlook some of
the other glaring issues
which is that crust.
Look at that.
Does that look like
your crust, Gordon?
I don't think so.
‐ That's too much
bread crumb, right?
‐ Yeah.
Well, the sauce has
a lot of flavor.
‐ Thank you.
‐ That's the only thing
I can gravitate towards
that gives me some relief
from the undercooking
of the lamb.
There's some
fundamental mistakes
that are very hard
to overlook.
Sam, I don't mind
the rare,
medium‐rare pink,
beautiful.
But blue
there's no excuse for.
( sighs )
The lamb, it's so rare
that even the fat
hasn't even rendered down.
Also, the actual
crumb mixture
is so bland
and anemic‐looking,
it looks unappetizing.
So, blue lamb...
is an insult to the cut.
I wouldn't even
( bleep ) swallow that.
I can't do that
to my palate.
( coughs )
Let me ask you this:
are you happy with it?
‐ I might eat it.
‐ You'd seriously
eat blue lamb?
Yeah, I would.
For you to turn round
and openly admit
that you'd eat
that ( bleep ),
that tells me
a lot about you, Sam.
I'm disappointed.
I really wanted to
impress the judges,
and I failed with that today.
But I know
that my flavors are there,
and I hope it's enough
to keep me safe.
Next up, Jennifer, please.
Let's go.
I lost my cool
during the cook,
but I feel like it doesn't
reflect on my plate.
I feel like
I pulled it together,
and I'm hoping this dish
will keep me here.
First of all, have you ever
been in an airplane
where it hits turbulence,
and the thing
starts nose‐diving?
‐ No.
‐ I have‐‐
watching you cook
across the last
60 minutes.
Are you confused
as much as I am right now?
What in
the ( bleep ) happened?
Gordon:
First of all,
have you ever been
in an airplane
where it hits turbulence
and the thing starts
nose‐diving?
‐ No.
‐ I have‐‐
watching you cook
across the last 60 minutes.
What in
the ( bleep ) happened?
I'm kind of at
a loss for words.
The only thing I can
think of is that
‐ I get panicky, 'cause‐‐
‐ Why?
You take people's
possessions away
for a living!
And you get yourself
in a tizz cooking
a piece of lamb?
‐ Are you ready to quit?
‐ No, I don't want to quit.
I'm not here to quit.
I want to be here.
‐ You do?
‐ Yes, chef.
‐ Then stay composed.
‐ Okay.
So, lamb is cooked pink.
Well done.
Let's taste it.
Here's the thing.
Lamb's cooked beautifully,
let's get that right.
Sauce, carrots,
cooked beautifully.
However, you put the rack
back in the oven upside down.
That's why it's
slightly soggy underneath.
Not a big deal.
You did a really good job.
Stop working yourself up.
Stay composed, confident,
and don't show
that weakness.
‐ Promise?
‐ I promise.
‐ Good girl.
‐ Okay, thank you.
Cate:
Good job, Jennifer.
( cheers, applause )
Aarón:
Miss Caitlin.
Please come down.
( applause )
Caitlin:
I have been barely sliding
by in this competition.
'Cause I have been in the bottom
three times in a row,
so I really need to show
the judges why I deserve
to stay in this competition.
Aarón:
Caitlin, so you've cooked
with lamb before?
Very rarely.
Once or twice on Easter
with my family.
Well, you know what?
I couldn't tell.
‐ It looks like Easter around
here, because...
‐ Thank you.
this is something you could
find at many restaurants
all over the world.
Do you eat at a lot
of high‐end restaurants, or no?
I prefer to get humble groceries
and cook them up at home
in a way that I can
stretch my budget and focus
on my dance training.
The cooking of the lamb,
which is a true star here,
is out of this world.
I mean look at that.
You guys see that up there?
‐ Yeah.
‐ Yes, chef.
‐ That's medium rare.
‐ Gorgeous.
For me, the balance
is definitely there.
It's vibrant, it's fresh.
I love the fact
that you didn't go heavy
on the mustard.
I can see the color of the
potatoes have that beautiful
bronze exterior,
and you've wilted down
the carrots in such a way
that they truly are caramelized
and glazed. I love that.
‐ Well done.
‐ Thank you, chef.
Look at that lamb.
Unbelievable.
All right, what were you
worried about going into it?
I was primarily worried
about the cook on the lamb,
so I pulled it out
of the oven at 120 degrees
and let it rest
for at least ten minutes.
Well, you've nailed it.
Ten times over.
Look, pink.
Beautiful throughout.
Plating, great finesse.
What's the worse thing
about the dish?
You've got the breading
a little bit too clumsy.
‐ Okay.
‐ That's it.
Lamb's delicious.
Fondant, cooked beautifully.
Carrots braised beautifully.
I mean, it's
a restaurant‐quality dish.
Continue like this,
you're going to be
more than a threat.
‐ Very well done.
‐ Thank you so much.
‐ Good job, Caitlin.
‐ Nice job, Caitlin.
Finally.
Next up, please, Jenny.
Necco:
Come on, Jenny.
Going up in front of the judges
is always a nerve‐wracking
experience.
Especially when you're
replicating the dishes
of some of the best
chefs in the world.
They know those dishes
inside and out,
and so I'm scared
that I might not have gotten
the flavors completely right.
‐ All right, Miss Jenny.
‐ Yes, chef?
What was sort of your
biggest challenge over
this one hour cook?
Definitely getting
the lamb rack cleaned.
I didn't get it to the point
where I needed it to be,
but I did my best to get
off as much as I could.
I'm hoping I did
just enough.
Potato fondant is nice,
cooked well.
Carrots very well seasoned.
The cook on the lamb
is beautiful.
The sauce for me is really
the star that helps make
the lamb shine.
You know, visually, I would
have loved to see you spend
a little bit more time
on these bones here,
really polishing them off.
The flavors are there.
You did a pretty good job.
Thank you, chef.
The cooking of that lamb
is spectacular.
You did a beautiful sear
on the outside.
I think your crust
is one of the better crusts
that I've tasted so far.
I saw your lamb before
it became this.
You made something
really special.
I mean, you completely
transformed what at one point
didn't look like it
was salvageable.
‐ That's amazing.
‐ Thank you, chef.
‐ Good job.
‐ Jason: Great job, Jenny.
Daniel:
Killin' it.
Christina:
Newton, please bring
your plate forward.
In the previous challenge,
I've let the judges down.
But now,
I feel quite confident.
My meat looks good,
my accoutrements look good,
my sauce is excellent.
This is the time
to redeem myself.
All right, Newton,
ranch owner from Texas.
You definitely know meat.
How would you feel,
if you left tonight
on a butchering and meat
cooking challenge?
I don't know if I
can say "jackass,"
but my friends would give me
a hard time about it.
All right, let's dig in.
Now lamb, Gordon's
cooked medium rare.
Let's see how you did.
Uh, okay.
Newton...
um...
your lamb is...
( sighs )
Newton, wish I had
better news.
Your lamb is definitely
undercooked.
How much mustard
did you put on there?
That's a lot of heat.
Did you kind of use
that as the glue?
I did.
The carrots, the potatoes,
they're cooked beautifully,
but the crusting balance
of herbs is off,
and for me, beyond
the lamb being undercooked,
there's so much mustard.
That it tastes
like Dijon mustard
before it tastes like
beautiful gamey lamb.
If I thought anyone was going
to nail this challenge,
I thought it was you.
Maybe the only person
that would love
that dish is Sam.
I'm so disappointed
and disgusted with myself.
I'm supposed to be the guy
that skates through this
with a blindfold.
I actually feel
like I'm going home.
I've screwed the pooch.
Guys, this was an extremely
difficult challenge,
but two of you excelled
beyond our expectations.
The two people
that are absolutely
safe tonight are Eboni...
‐ Thank you, chef.
‐ and Caitlin.
‐ Daniel: Well deserved.
‐ Thank you.
Head up to the balcony.
Bum, bum, bum, bah.
I just heard the church
bells ringing. I'm safe.
Great job. Well done.
I cracked for just
a little bit, got nervous.
Not no more.
Everybody gotta be worried now.
All right, so there's
four of you.
The fact of the matter is
that two of you are safe.
Jenny, please step forward.
Jennifer, please step forward.
Tonight, you guys
did just enough
to stay in this competition
Please, head upstairs.
Jennifer:
I'm going up to the balcony,
now I'm safe,
and that is a huge relief.
There's no more getting
into a huffy puffy.
No more tailspins.
It's time to work.
It's time to figure out
how I'm gonna get
myself to the top.
Two of you stand here,
one of you will be leaving
this competition tonight.
Sam, you are clearly passionate,
let's get that right.
You're a smart,
intelligent young man,
but that test got
the better of you.
Newton, you are talented.
You do have a future in food.
But your dish
was just a disgrace.
My money was on you.
Tonight, you let yourself
down, you let me down.
Gentlemen, one of you knows,
it's the end of the road.
If that's you, please,
go ahead and untie your
apron, gracefully.
Christina, Aarón,
and myself agree.
Newton, say goodbye to Sam,
head on upstairs.
Good luck, buddy.
Good luck to you always.
Sam, were really
hoping you would have
bounced back tonight,
but you are not ready
to become America's
next master chef.
Sam:
You know, cooking,
it's something I love.
I'm happy because
I think the criticism
that I got from you guys
made me stronger,
and I feel privileged.
Sam, please place
your apron on your bench
and go back to school.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Bye, Sam. We love you.
Caitlin:
Love you, Sam.
Sam took a bullet
for me, today.
Feel bad for him,
happy as hell for me.
I think this was a good
kick in my pants
to get me laser‐focused.
I gotta take every one
of these challenges on
as if it's my last.
Sam, best wishes.
Bye, Sam.
Announcer:
Next time on "MasterChef"...
Service!
...the home cooks run
a five‐star restaurant service.
Too many, one pancake.
But will this high‐end
breakfast challenge...
Burning your eggs.
...leave one team scrambled?
Where's my two and two?!
It's not up, it's done.
If my pancakes are up,
then they're dying.
You need to get this together.
Five‐star hotel,
and we're serving that.
Oh, my God.
Followed by a pressure test...
Fish and chips.
...that's a Gordon Ramsay
classic.